during the 1940s more than 15,000
Palestinians were killed in dozens of
massacres committed by Zionist forces
the first mass killing was recorded at
balad Al where at least 60 Palestinians
were killed by the hagana forces in
April 1948 an estimated 110 villagers
were murdered by Zionist paramilitary
forces in the village of De Yasin near
what is now occupied East Jerusalem but
the killings didn't stop there after
Israel was created at least 200 V were
reportedly killed in fighting and Max
executions between May the 22nd and 23rd
in 1948 at tantura near
haa Ilan Pape an Israeli historian who
wrote the book the ethnic cleansing of
Palestine he's a professor of history at
the University of exiter and joins us
now from Detroit in the US good to have
you with us sir on the program how
should we compare what
happened how should we compare what
happened in 19 48 to 2024 is it
comparable well there are some features
which are comparable but on in many
other respects it's even worse uh than
uh the events of 1948 you already
mention yourself the difference in the
numbers of uh Palestinians killed uh but
I think the main difference is that the
U impulse in 1948 was to try and expel
this as many Palestinians as possible
the massacres were then used in order to
persuade people to leave I think what we
see now are massacres which are part of
a genocidal impulse namely to kill
people in order to downsize the number
of people living in the Gaza ethnic
cleansing is a terrible crime against
humanity but genocide is even worse so I
think we are seeing a transition from
using ethnic cleansing the methods of
taking as much of Palestine as possible
with as few Palestinians in it as
possible we are moving into a far more
lethal method that of genocide and that
lethal method is is voiced by government
officials I mean in the first few months
of the war Israel's AG Israel's
agriculture Minister described the
current displacement and persecution uh
of Palestinians in Gaza as the knar of
Gaza 2023 I mean these comments are sort
of in line with the way the government
has been talking ever since it was put
into
Power yes well that is very interesting
because for many many years official
Israelis denied the nakba denied that
they were responsible for ethnic lensing
that including uh more than 30 massacres
of Palestinians but then how using it uh
in a way that we always thought thought
that they always said that they used
which was to try and eliminate the
Palestinians in 1948 and they are now
warning the Palestinian that they would
do again or would perpetrate again the
very crime that they claimed had never
existed so at least if something
positive can come out of this horrific
chapter in the history of Palestine is
at least for the world now not to deny
anymore the crime that was committed in
1948 which is now admitted fully by the
very Israeli politicians that have just
mentioned and of course the nakba in
1948 it was supported by Western States
and Colonial Powers there is a
comparison to what we're seeing in 2024
as well isn't there yet these very
Western powers are also saying that
there isn't a genocide going on most of
them
anyway I think now it's even worse
because at the time in 1948 there was no
television people did not have
smartphones and it was relative easy to
cover up the uh the NBA the ethnic
cleansing and uh to claim that it didn't
exist it is impossible to say now that
people cannot know what is going on when
it appears on our screens whether on
small screen or big screens so I think
the level of denial uh today is far more
Sinister far more outraging and uh
really I think is one of the main
reasons why the civil societies even in
the west find it impossible to be silent
anymore and are LED Now by a brave group
students all around the United States
and elsewhere to show that they know
exactly what goes on and they do all
they can to stop it yeah I did want to
come to that question because Global
societies really are calling this a
genocide and they're sort of calling
their own governments out do you think I
mean in more or less you know we're
going to European elections soon here in
the European continent the United
Kingdom is going to go to a general
election very soon do you think this is
going to come back to bite these
politicians you might say in the
posterior for for not listening to their
public who have been coming out in the
hundreds of thousands in capital capital
cities not just in Europe but across the
world well first of all I hope that it
will and we can mention also the
election in United States it's very
clear that the Arab American vote and
Progressive people are now a bit
doubtful whether they should support
Biden although they don't want to
support Trump because of Biden's policy
towards Gaza uh I'm a bit skeptical that
in the next elections in Europe uh uh
politicians would be still uh would
change their basic indifference and the
international immunity they have
provided to Israel but I'm confident
that uh in the near future beyond the
2024 elections this kind of attitude
that has been displayed by European
politicians would come back to bite them
because they are not representing
Faithfully their electorates when it
comes to Palestine they never did before
but in particularly in the last seven
months their positions have been very
different from the moral position
displayed by most of the people who have
a modicom of Consciousness and decency
in them when they understand what goes
on in Gaza and when they're showing the
support for the people of Gaza it's good
to get your Insight sir and the
relationship to history as well Ilan
Pape thanks so much for joining us from
Detroit thank
you cameras have captured the struggle
of Palestinian refugees then and now
over the past 76 years Palestinians say
the ongoing Israeli War and the military
expansion are clear evidence of a second
nakba
[Music]
[Laughter]
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al jazer